[wind blows through dry grass]
You are in south Texas
and you're at the El Tule ranch
owned by Miss Nancy B. Negley.
And ranch administrator,
you're hearing him speak
is Lavoyger Johnny Durham.
[hooves crunch dry grass]
[low rumbling]
I think the flag's already
flown off of it and stuff.
I haven't checked on it in a good while.
They got a windmill
right there, real close.
I just got a lot of exposure
and a lot of publicity with it.
Ya know, people in the North
and stuff, they don't have any illegals.
I mean, they have illegals all over, but--
[branch scrapes door]
not walking...
not walking.
I've been interviewed
about 10 or 15 times concerning that.
Wall Street Journal.
A lot of Telemundos, NBC, CBS...
uh, all those people.
I basically tell 'em what I'm telling you.
I had my routine.
I meet 'em up there at the gate.
I take 'em to my trash site.
I take 'em to my water tank.
I bring 'em in there in my little museum.
And then about that,
you know, they're done.
So they've heard
everything I wanted to say.
I ain't got nothing else.
[wind rustles leaves and branches]
This is two cowboy plants.
This one is called Widow's Tear.
And it's got some distilled water in there
See it?
You can still see it dropping outta there.
They've got some distilled water in there
and, uh...
cowboys, when you're riding
in the back of the herd
and you get a buncha
god dang dirt in your eyes,
you stop by and pick some of this
and add it to your eye.
And it's better than Visene.
Widow's Tear.
My AA name is LJ.
My Mexican cowboy name was Bocha.
And then my real name
of course, is Lavoyger.
So if you can't pronounce
Lavoyger, that's your problem.
But that's my name.
I live out here on the ranch.
I live by myself.
Ya know, what other good way
is it to keep up with people?
[mouse clicks]
with your friends and stuff?
And then I got a little obsessed
with it...Kinda like...
everybody's waiting for me
to put pictures on there, ya know?
So I just had to do it
and I do two every night.
That's my father
that came out on the...
front cover
of Life Magazine.
I'm very proud of that picture.
I was born and raised on the Norias
division of the King Ranch.
And then I left there in 1989.
And I've been here at the El Tule Ranch
since May the 5th of 1990.
And there's Harry Whittington.
The one that uh....
Dick Cheney shot...
and plugged, with Ms. Negley.
One of the last times he was ever here.
That's Lady Bird.
She came down there a couple of times.
Lady Bird Johnson.
He's one of the dead people that we found.
This guy, he had a perfect
golden star on his tooth.
[a bird chirps and trees rustle]
[door clangs]
This is where all her guests and
all her family come down here and visit.
and do a little hunting as far as quails and doves...
and you've got a cook, got everything.
All they gotta do is
just shoot 'em and eat 'em.
[camera clicks]
This is the before picture.
Get it on the iPhone.
Watch it!
You're blocking that.
Wesley! What are you doing over there?
Got it.
-Alright! You're the man!
- Thank you!
[engine cranks]
[walkie talkie beeps]
[walkie beeps]
Bingo. We're off.
[truck bleeps]
See, the outrider found the bird
That the gun you're shooting?
We're gonna go towards him and
find out where they're at.
Lavoyger, where are...
Mike, come on over here.
Lavoyger, do you know
if we have booties for the dog?
Oh God. I told you.
Let me have that Dick.
[gun clicks]
They're not flying.
They're just running.
[Holbrook] They're running?
Well, do we want to use the
flusher for this one?
They're running, he says.
Where are they?
I just saw them right there, right now.
All right. Well, two the right.
One to the left.
I'll go through the middle.
y'all go on the flanks
and I'll try to run 'em out in front.
Listen, they're gonna jump over
towards the Arroyo of course.
[Jonathan] You gonna go out Lavoyger?
What?
You going?
Yeah I'm gonna go.
Come on!
Are you gonna drive or what?
My feet were so tough and I know
you won't believe me, but I don't care...
that I would put a cactus patch on
the ground and I'd walk over it.
They've been here for a long time, so
we don't know where in the heck they're at.
I had a lot of, in a sense, a
lot of shame because of my father.
He wanted for me to be tough.
and he put a lot of pressure on me.
Ya know, if you wanna be a man,  you can't cry
and ya know, you gotta go through all that stuff.
Right in through there, boys.
When I was in the first or second grade
we were going to the...to the
old ranch with the cattle pens and
And he told me when I
got through opening the gate and
I jumped back in the car,
that he wanted for me to...
to start to doing two things.
One is to start wearing shoes
and the other one is
to start speaking English to him.
But I was just a little kid.
I think I was in the first or second grade.
[slow, rhythmic clapping]
Chasing butterflies again
[crackling brush]
[Lavoyger] Jonathan.
They hit right to the left of
that ...Dick, there it goes!!!
Ahhhhh....my God!
Load up!
[Holbrook] Ruthie, come here!
[whistles]
Ruthie! Come here!
[Dick] Good dog, Ruthie.
Come on, Ruthie. Come on.
Ruthie, heel!
Come on!
C'mere!
Good girl.
[kissy sound]
[dog panting and crunching the brush]
Come on, Ruthie!
Come on!
Come on, let's go!
C'mere!
[Holbrook] She run over it?
[Ryan] Uh huh.
She got it.
Okay.
Hey, good job Ruthie.
[quail squeaks]
[Holbrook] Ruthie, heel!
Come here!
Good girl.
Good girl. Come on!
[whistles]
C'mon. No no no.
Ruthie, come on. Hey.
[engine running]
When I was going to school,
everybody that didn't like me, ya know
they found out that my mother was
Mexican and they'd come around and
call me pepper belly and spic and all that shit.
And those were kinda like...
fighting words. And...
It didn't make any difference how big the guy was.
I'd get in a fight with him.
because I didn't feel like
they were making fun of me...
They were actually making fun of my mother.
And that really hurt me...
indirectly.
But I'm over that right now.
[cross talk]
It's illegals crossing, probably.
Just leaving their water bottles.
You find 'em under a lot of trees and...
[twigs snapping]
They'll be all over the ranch.
[twigs crunching]
[bottles thud against metal]
They wait for the pickup
which is right there on 285.
[Holbrook] Man...
[exhales]
being a coyote would not be fun.
[exhaling] whew...
[Lavoyger] You will, if you get paid.
Holbrook!
Yes?! What do you need?
[Lavoyger] Coyote gets paid about $4,000.
I know, but the coyote also
probably has blood on their hands
because when someone
twists an ankle, they keep going.
They'll kill 'em right there.
That doesn't make any difference to them.
They will?
The more people they get up there,
the more they get paid.
They leave them behind.
They have children that
come through here!
So they gotta take care of 'em.
[Ryan] It's not like the Navy seals.
[Jonathan] No, they'll do
whatever they gotta do.
[Holbrook] No, it's terrible.
[Kate] Lavoyger, have you caught any live...
[Jonathan] Each of them get paid two, three grand.
[Lavoyger] What Kate?
Have you caught any live...
people?
Any live?
[Ryan snickering] live?
Well no! I mean...
[Hillary] Any a-live.
live...humans.
[Jonathan] Like the border patrol catch em?
Is that what you're saying?
[Kate] Well, I know how he finds...
he'll interview them when he...
when they come to his...
And have you brought them to your house
and interviewed any lately?
Yes. They've gone to his house.
Not lately, but I love to interview 'em
They come to my house for two reasons.
One, they get raided.
Two, you're a nice guy.
some of 'em get lost.
Okay?
They don't know nothing about where
they're supposed to go.
And you got, got satellite TV.
Two...Two
Did you ask the question or did he?
[laughter]
I asked the question.
That's why I'm listening.
Thank you very much, Holbrook.
Just hold back here a little bit.
You'll have your time here in a minute.
The other reason that they
come back is when they get left
and they get left because they
can't keep up with the coyote.
That's terrible.
Right
Then they're lost.
And they come up there my house..
and I asked them, "How many are you?"
And they said, "Well, it's me."
I said, "Sweetheart, you look very tired.
Don't you want to go back home?"
and she says, "Yes."
And I said, "I'll tell you what I'm gonna do."
Said, "I'm gonna give you some water and
I'm gonna give you something to eat."
"And then I'm gonna tell
my camera man to come over here."
"And do you mind if we interview you?"
Yeah.
And they said, "No."
So they'll sit there and eat and
I'm sitting over there and Isaac has
got my little camera corder and I'm
asking them in English and in Spanish.
So the gringo can get me on YouTube
and can understand. Like him, see?
and I'm always fascinated...
by how a woman from Salvador
or Guatemala or Honduras...
Makes it all the way up here on her own?
make it all the way up here.
And then you send them back.
Well, she wants to.
She does?
Yes.
The ones that said, "Noooo, I can't.
I don't want to go back."
And I said, "Well...[hits truck]
Get in that Excursion.
I wanna give you some water.
I wanna give you some food.
Get in that Excursion.
I wanna take you to the highway.
Ya hit this pipeline,
it'll take you to Falfurrias.
You can hide there.
Okay?
And if you get tired...
you just get on the highway
and somebody will pick you up [slaps truck]
Usually a border patrol.
[Holbrook] That is...
that is not a fun trek for those people.
[Lavoyger laughing]
Uhfff.
[Kate] No, I mean...
[Holbrook] No, gracias.
[Lavoyger sighs]
No, thank you.
[Kate]I wonder how far they've come to this point.
[windmill clanking]
[Woman speaks in Spanish]
Por diner..
[in Spanish TBD]
Por gusto.
[sniffles]
They say that uh...
I was asking her, "Why did they
kill your parents and husband
and everything and said,
"Well, lots of times they, did do it for fun.
And sometimes they do it for a...
demanding...money.
That they want money down there."
Los...
si...sicarios?
Sicarios.
The murderers.
[crying, sniffles]
Y quantos hijos tienes a ya?
How many kids.
Tres.
She's got got three sons left over there.
She oughta explain it to the immigration officer
or officers, that the reason
that she left over there was
because she wanted
to get away and ah...
probably send some
money back to her sons to...
support 'em. And
if she goes back, she's afraid they'll kill her.
Like they did her husband and her parents and...
a lot of her family.
Well, since my mother was Mexican...
and my father was kinda gringo...
[laughing] I always say that I can...
jump the fence either way.
wherever I'm needed the least.
[raspy laughter]
I've got compassion...I,
ya know, I...I...
Like some of these people
that I interview or give a ride to...
it's all according to the way I feel.
And I tell the border patrol that.
I'm not aiding and abetting people
because I give them a ride up there
to the to the main highway
and stuff.
And if I feel like it...
I turn 'em in.
And if I don't feel like it...
I leave 'em alone.
Most of the time I leave 'em alone.
Over here, over here.
[Lavoyger] Go around Ryan.
So squeeze through there then
[Lavoyger] Oooohhh Lord.
Just so we can cover some ground--
Y'all!
Watch out for snakes, dammit.
I see 'em.
They're over there in the back.
[Holbrook] I got 'em.
Alright. They're gunning.
[Lavoyger] Here they go!
Bird!
[bang!]
[Ryan] God!
[bang! bang!]
I missed that right in front of me!
[gun clicks]
[Jonathan] Hold on, hold on, hold on.
Bird!
[wings chittering]
There it goes! Right there!
Right there! Right there!
[bang! bang! bang!]
[Lavoyger] That was it.
Dead in here. Dead, dead, dead, dead.
Dead in here. Dead.
[whistling] Shhh!
[Holbrook] C'mere!
[whistles]
Dead. Dead.
There ya go.
[Holbrook] Good girrrrlll.
[Jonathan in high pitch]
Come on Ruthie! Come on! Good girl. Good girl.
Ruthie, back in the truck!
[laughter]
[Holbrook] Who would like a water? Anyone?
[Kate] I would, please.
[Holbrook] Little son of a gun...
just got outta my grasp.
Have you ever had
it before? Franklins?
[Dick] No, I haven't.
[hunting party chatting]
There's no beans over here?
[laughs]
I've always said that my job description...
is that I'm a professional
entertainer without the guitar.
People say that...
I've got this John Wayne
intimidating look or something like that.
And, I don't pretend to be that way.
I always say if I had a dang zipper...
here in my gut...
you could open it up and see
that small little scared kid in there.
So I'm not, I'm not a...
ya know, a macho acting guy.
[guns pop]
You might take me as that,
but I don't mean to be that.
No. I'm very simple.
I'm very simple...
[Lavoyger] Bring it this way.
[engine gets louder]
[guns pop 6 times]
[truck squeaks]
[voices inaudible over engine roar]
Ho!
[gun popping]
[horn beeps 3 times]
[Jonathan] Bird! Bird! Dick!
[pow! pow!]
[Dick growling] Ahhh!
[Jonathan] Hold on, hold on.
Let him reload!
[click!]
[wings flapping]
[Jonathan] Right here! Bird!
[bang!]
[rapid shots]
[Ryan] Nice shot, Dick.
[Dick] Did that one go down that one down?
[Ryan] That one went down this way.
[walkie voice] Two seconds...
[twigs crunching. Engine idling.]
[Holbrook] the one that the first shot.
[Jonathan] Yeah, yeah, yeah...
It might have not have fallen
'cause two of 'em just came over here.
[Holbrook] Yeah, cut all that honking out.
I'm trying to focus.
C'mon, c'mon, c'mon.
Dead in here.
Dead! Dead, dead, dead. C'mon.
Ruthie, I think it's over here.
Ruthie, get over here.
C'mon. [whistles]
All right, let's go.
Let's go get another covey.
Come on, Ruthie.
[whistles]
Ruthie! Come on!
Huge disappointment, Ruthie.
[Jonathan on walkie]
Now there's some birds over here.
[Jonathan] They're both over there.
[wings flutter]
[bang! bang!]
[Ryan] Gya!
[bang!]
[Jonathan] That's it, Dick.
I don't think anymore.
Okay.
[Holbrook] Good!
That was a nice, nice finale.
JR! How many birds?
15 sir!
15. Okay.
That's pretty good for the...
That's actually the truck limit
[crosstalk] the junk truck
didn't get nothin'.
Dead, deeaaad.
Dead.
Dead in here.
[Lavoyger] He just...
he just threw a bird down there.
[finger snaps] Dead. Dead in here.
Dead in here. Deaaad. Deaaad.
Deaad. Dead in here.
Dead in here, Thor!
Dead in here.
Deaaad, deaad, deaaad, deaad.
Dead in here. Dead in dere.
[bird chirps]
Dead. Deaaad.
Good boyyy! Here!
Good boyyy.
Good boy.
Not many people admire a good hunting dog.
They just don't.
I like to see good dog work and point and...
Ms. Negley did too.
I hit it pretty hard everytime
Holbrook is coming over.
[dog barks]
[Holbrook cackling]
You can sprain your hand reaaall easy.
On one of those heavy bags.
[Lavoyger] Bingo, bingo, bingo.
[Lavoyger] That's Bing Crosby up there...Ryan.
Where?
Up there on top.
Right there. You lookin' at him? Yep.
[Ryan] Uh, why do you not have
any pictures of Holbrook?
[Holbrook] That was on the King Ranch?
[Lavoyger] Yep.
I love pictures.
I got about 150,000 in my computer.
[Dick] No kidding.
Yeah.
There's my father
in front of Life magazine over there
and I made it in front of Texas monthly in 1980.
[Ryan] Hey, which one of these
snakes is the one that gotchya?
[Lavoyger] Both of 'em
♫
♪ Cowboys are frequently ♪
♪ Secretly fond of each other. ♪
[hearty laughter]
♪ What did you think all them
saddles and boots was about? ♪
[chuckling]
That's it. That's just a teaser.
[Holbrook laughs] Alright.
[Ryan] That's good. That may be your--
Well, thank you
for tuning it in.
[Dick laughs]
That's when I was in Texas Military Institute.
These are all the ones that I posted on Facebook.
Here's the-um...
Uh, I've got pictures of
everything that I've picked up.
And this is some of the...
uh...some of the bodies.
Everybody wants 'em.
They just want to have proof to...
to show, I guess, of ah..
what's really happening.
[distant dog barks]
[sharply inhales]
This is the...
unknown, see?
Back to where I was here.
This is all the books that I...that's a...
well, they didn't have Pepita in it though.
My skunk.
[click]
Miss Negley.
My two grandkids.
[clicks]
Ms. Negley.
Laura.
Katherine Armstrong.
All I can tell you is that
I've been here for 25 years...
and ah...
I have personally...
picked up 25 dead people.
I was surprised...
and compassioned and kind of pity and...
a little heartbroken to see
somebody just dead out there. Yeah.
But, uh...
You get accustomed to that.
[leaves clicking in wind]
Yep.
If you trust me,
ya won't do what I ask you to...
But...this is called lime prickly ash.
That little tree there.
And also...
When Cowboys would be
on a cattle drive or something like that
then they'd have a toothache...
well, they'd chew this...
and it numbs your mouth.
And your tongue and everything else.
They call it palo amuela.
Some common names are tickle tongue.
But the real name is lime prickly ash.
The reason I put the...
first water tank of this kind...
was I have picked up six dead people
on that trail and they've
all died, we assume...
95% of 'em do...
of dehydration.
and they needed water.
and nobody wants for
people to die on their ranch.
And I wanted to save some lives.
Not that it did save any lives.
But not that it didn't.
I mean, who knows?
It was there.
[grass and leaves rustling]
[high pitched bird chirps]
[a distant windmill clanks]